THE MAHABHARATA

BHISHMA PARVA (The Book of Bhishma)

SECTION I

When the armies of the Pandavas and Kauravas were arrayed for battle on the field of Kurukshetra, Duryodhana approached Drona, his preceptor in arms, and said: "Behold, O preceptor, the mighty army of the Pandavas, arrayed by thy disciple, the son of Drupada."

Drona replied: "I see the army of the Pandavas, arrayed by Drupada's son. There are many mighty warriors in their ranks: Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Drupada and his sons, the mighty warrior-king Virata, and the valiant Yuyudhana.

"Behold also the mighty warriors of our side: thyself, O Brahmana, and Bhishma, Karna and Kripa, Aswatthama, Vikarna, and the son of Somadatta, and many other heroes armed with diverse weapons and skilled in warfare."

SECTION II

As the two armies stood facing each other, the conches were blown. Krishna, the charioteer of Arjuna, blew his conch Panchajanya. Arjuna blew his conch Devadatta. Bhima, of terrible deeds, blew his great conch Paundra. King Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, blew his conch Anantavijaya. Nakula and Sahadeva blew their conches, the Sughosha and the Manipushpaka.

The king of Kashi, the mighty archer; Shikhandi, the great warrior; Dhrishtadyumna, the son of Drupada; Virata and the invincible Satyajit; Drupada and his sons; the mighty-armed Yudhamanyu, and the strong Uttamauja; the son of Subhadra, Saubhadra; and the sons of Draupadi, all of them mighty chariot-warriors, blew their respective conches.

SECTION III

The terrible sound, reverberating through the heavens and the earth, rent the hearts of the Kauravas. Then, Duryodhana and his brothers, and all the kings of the earth, quickly grasped their bows.

At that moment, Arjuna, whose banner bore the emblem of Hanuman, spoke to Krishna: "Place my chariot, O Krishna, in the midst of the two armies. Let me behold those who stand here desirous of fighting, and with whom I must contend in this terrible battle."

SECTION IV

Krishna placed the chariot between the two armies, facing Bhishma, Drona, and all the kings. He said: "Behold, O Arjuna, the assembled Kauravas."

Arjuna saw his kinsmen standing there: grandfathers, fathers-in-law, sons, brothers, grandsons, friends, fathers-in-law, well-wishers, and teachers. Seeing all these kinsmen thus arrayed, Arjuna was overcome with compassion.

With a troubled mind, he spoke: "Seeing my own kinsmen, O Krishna, arrayed here eager to fight, my limbs fail me, my mouth is dry, my body trembles, and my hair stands on end."

SECTION V

Arjuna continued: "I see no good in killing my own kinsmen in battle. I do not desire victory, nor kingdom, nor pleasures. What good is kingdom to us, O Krishna, or enjoyments, or even life itself?"

"Those for whom we desire kingdom, enjoyments, and pleasures—teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and other kinsmen—are here, having renounced their lives and fortunes."

"I do not wish to kill them, even if they kill me, O Krishna, not even for the sake of the kingdom of the three worlds, how then for this earth?"

SECTION VI

Krishna, seeing Arjuna overcome with sorrow and his eyes filled with tears, spoke these words: "Arjuna, how has this infatuation overtaken you in this hour of peril? It is not befitting of an honorable man. It does not lead to heaven, nor does it bring fame."

"Yield not to unmanliness, O Arjuna. It does not befit you. Shake off this base faint-heartedness and arise, O scorcher of enemies!"

SECTION VII

Arjuna said: "How shall I fight Bhishma and Drona with arrows, O Krishna? They are my reverend elders, my teachers. It is better to live on alms than to slay these noble elders."

"Slaying these elders, we should only taste bloodied enjoyments. I do not know which is better: that we should conquer them, or that they should conquer us. Even if we kill them, I do not wish to live."

SECTION VIII

Krishna said: "You mourn for those who should not be mourned, while the wise do not grieve for either the dead or the living. Never was there a time when I was not, nor when you were not, nor when these lords of men were not. Nor will there ever be a time when we shall not exist."

"As the soul passes through childhood, youth, and old age in this body, so it passes to another body. The wise are not deluded by this."

"O son of Kunti, the contacts of the senses with their objects give rise to feelings of heat and cold, pleasure and pain. They come and go, and they are impermanent. Endure them, O Arjuna."

SECTION IX

Krishna continued: "That which is non-existent can never come into being, and that which is can never cease to be. Those who know the truth about the soul see that it is eternal, indestructible, and unborn."

"The body is mortal, but the soul is immortal. Therefore, fight, O Arjuna. Those who think that they can kill the soul, and those who think that the soul can be killed, are both ignorant. The soul neither kills nor is killed."

"When the body is destroyed, the soul is not destroyed. Eternally present in all bodies, this soul cannot be slain. Therefore, fight, O Arjuna."

SECTION X

"Considering your duty as a Kshatriya, you should not waver, for there is nothing higher for a Kshatriya than a righteous war. Happy are the Kshatriyas who are called upon to fight in such a war, that comes of itself as an open gate to heaven."

"But if you do not fight this righteous war, then you will fail in your duty, lose your reputation, and incur sin. People will tell of your everlasting disgrace. For a man of honor, disgrace is worse than death."

SECTION XI

"The great warriors who held you in high esteem will think that you fled from battle out of fear. Your enemies will speak of you in contemptuous terms. What could be more painful than this?"

"If you are killed, you will attain heaven; if you are victorious, you will enjoy the earth. Therefore, arise, O Arjuna, resolved to fight. Having made pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat the same, engage in battle for the sake of battle. Thus you will not incur sin."

SECTION XII

"This is the wisdom of the Sankhya philosophy: hear it, O Arjuna. The senses are said to be superior to the body, the mind is superior to the senses, the intelligence is superior to the mind, and the soul is superior to the intelligence."

"Thus, O Arjuna, knowing the soul to be superior to the intelligence, control the mind by the intelligence and kill this enemy in the form of desire, which is difficult to conquer."

SECTION XIII

Arjuna asked: "What are the marks of one who is established in wisdom, whose mind is steady, O Krishna? How does the man of steady wisdom speak, how does he sit, how does he move?"

Krishna replied: "When a man casts out all desires from his mind, and is satisfied in the self by the self, then he is called a man of steady wisdom."

"The sage whose mind is not agitated in sorrow, who does not crave for pleasure, who is free from attachment, fear, and anger, is called a man of steady wisdom."

SECTION XIV

"The sage who is not attached to anything anywhere, who neither rejoices on obtaining what is pleasant nor sorrows on obtaining what is unpleasant, his wisdom is established. When, like the tortoise that draws in its limbs from all directions, he withdraws his senses from their objects, his wisdom is established."

"The objects of sense turn away from the abstinent man, but not the taste for them. Even the taste turns away when the Supreme is seen."

SECTION XV

"The turbulent senses, O Arjuna, forcibly carry away the mind of even a wise man, though he be striving to control them. Having restrained them all, let one sit steadfast, devoted to Me. His wisdom is steady whose senses are under control."

"When a man thinks of objects, attachment to them arises. From attachment arises desire. From desire arises anger. From anger arises delusion. From delusion arises confusion of memory. From confusion of memory arises loss of reason. From loss of reason arises destruction."

"But the self-controlled soul, moving among sense objects, with senses free from attachment and aversion, attains tranquility. In tranquility, all sorrow is destroyed. For the intellect of the tranquil-minded is soon established."

SECTION XVI

Arjuna said: "O Krishna, what is the mark of the man of steady wisdom, established in meditation? How does he speak, how does he sit, how does he move?"

Krishna replied: "When a man gives up all desires that arise in the mind and is satisfied in the self by the self, then he is called a man of steady wisdom."

"He whose mind is not disturbed by any anxiety, who is free from all desire, is called a sage of steady wisdom. In whatever state a man may be, if he remains free from attachment and aversion, that state is conducive to his spiritual growth."

SECTION XVII

"The yogi who is satisfied with the knowledge and wisdom that he has obtained, who remains unshaken in all circumstances, who has mastered his senses, and to whom a clod of earth, a stone, and gold are all the same—that yogi is said to be established in yoga."

"He who is of good nature, who is friendly and compassionate, who is free from attachment and egoism, who is balanced in pleasure and pain, who is forgiving, who is ever content, who has subdued his senses, whose will is firm, whose mind and intellect are merged in the Divine—that devotee is dear to Me."

SECTION XVIII

Thus, in the field of Kurukshetra, on the eve of the great battle, Krishna taught Arjuna the eternal wisdom of the Bhagavad Gita. Hearing these words of Krishna, Arjuna, his delusion dispelled, said: "My delusion is gone. I have regained my memory through your grace, O Krishna. I stand firm, my doubts are gone. I will act according to your word."

Then Arjuna, taking up his bow, said to Krishna: "I will fight." And the battle began.
